Testing tapjacking/overlay - Issue1103 (#1642)
OWASP/owasp-mstg: Document/0x05h-Testing-Platform-Interaction.md

#### Dynamic Analysis

To identify the existence of this vulnerability, create a sample APK consisting of a single activity and Toast dialog. Upon installing the sample APK on the device and post launching it, if the toast dialog overlays on the application to test then it is vulnerable to Tapjacking.

You can also test this vulnerability using an automated tool called [QARK](https://github.com/linkedin/qark "Qark"). [This article](https://resources.infosecinstitute.com/android-penetration-tools-walkthrough-series-qark "Android Penetration Tools Walkthrough Series: QARK") from Infosec institute explains this tool and how to use it for detecting tapjacking on OWASP's GoatDroid application.

> 

Reviewer: What do you think if we just remove this sub section and include it on the next PR once it was researched and we can include some POCs or similar. I tend to think that there's less that the app can do to avoid this, it's rather the system which has this vulnerability. So the tester can _only_ check the target/minSdk-value maybe and ensure that the OS version is not vulnerable. Of course if needed one can develop POCs such as https://github.com/iwo/marshmallow-tapjacking. 

Also the QARK example is pretty outdated, the [exploit APK is built against SDK 18](https://github.com/linkedin/qark/blob/b6ad07b8956e5f056fbdac1bf777b06ed76a7260/qark/exploit_apk/app/src/main/AndroidManifest.xml#L18) and QARK seems to simply check the minSdk value being <9. See here: https://github.com/linkedin/qark/blob/b6ad07b8956e5f056fbdac1bf777b06ed76a7260/qark/plugins/manifest/min_sdk.py#L9

Reviewer: Here's the issue: https://github.com/OWASP/owasp-mstg/issues/1719

To start your static analysis you can check the source code for the following methods and attributes (non-exhaustive list):

- Override [`onFilterTouchEventForSecurity`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/View#onFilterTouchEventForSecurity%28android.view.MotionEvent%29 "onFilterTouchEventForSecurity") for more fine-grained control and to implement a custom security policy for views.
- Set the layout attribute [`android:filterTouchesWhenObscured`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/View#attr_android:filterTouchesWhenObscured "android:filterTouchesWhenObscured") to true or call [`setFilterTouchesWhenObscured`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/View.html#setFilterTouchesWhenObscured%28boolean%29 "setFilterTouchesWhenObscured").

> - Check [FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/MotionEvent.html#FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED "FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED") (since API level 9) or [FLAG_WINDOW_IS_PARTIALLY_OBSCURED](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/MotionEvent.html#FLAG_WINDOW_IS_PARTIALLY_OBSCURED "FLAG_WINDOW_IS_PARTIALLY_OBSCURED") (starting on API level 29). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check [FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/MotionEvent.html#FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED "FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED") (since API level 9) or [FLAG_WINDOW_IS_PARTIALLY_OBSCURED](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/MotionEvent.html#FLAG_WINDOW_IS_PARTIALLY_OBSCURED "FLAG_WINDOW_IS_PARTIALLY_OBSCURED") (starting on API level 29).
```

1. For the actual persistence: Use the techniques described in the data storage chapter.
2. For reflection-based approaches: Use Xposed to hook into the deserialization methods or add unprocessable information to the serialized objects to see how they are handled (e.g., whether the application crashes or extra information can be extracted by enriching the objects).

### Testing for Tapjacking Vulnerability (MSTG-PLATFORM-9)

#### Overview

> Tapjacking is a vulnerability wherein the malicious application leverages screen overlay feature of android to capture user taps, keystrokes. That is because an active screen overlay can listen for taps and intercept any information being passed in the underlying activity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Tapjacking is a vulnerability in which the malicious application abuses the screen overlay feature of Android to capture user taps and keystrokes. This is possible because an active screen overlay can listen for taps and intercept any information being passed in the underlying activity.
```

Reviewer 2: Do you have any examples of real world apps that were abusing this? Would be good to mention here, links to blogs, etc.

Reviewer: Good idea, it'd help a lot

> #### Static analysis

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Static Analysis
```

> Check the source code for either or implementation of below techniques:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Check the source code for implementation of any of the below techniques:
```

> - Override [onFilterTouchEventForSecurity()](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/View#onFilterTouchEventForSecurity%28android.view.MotionEvent%29)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Override [onFilterTouchEventForSecurity()](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/View#onFilterTouchEventForSecurity%28android.view.MotionEvent%29 "onFilterTouchEventForSecurity")
```

Reviewer: @Sven I've updated your suggestion to remove the parentheses and put the backticks

> - Set [android:filterTouchesWhenObscured](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/View.html#setFilterTouchesWhenObscured%28boolean%29) to true

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Set [android:filterTouchesWhenObscured](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/View.html#setFilterTouchesWhenObscured%28boolean%29 "android:filterTouchesWhenObscured") to true
```

> - [FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/MotionEvent.html#FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/MotionEvent.html#FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED "FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED")
```

> Presence of any of this technique will safeguard the application from this vulnerability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When implementing any of these mechanisms, the application is not vulnerable anymore to Tapjacking.
```

Reviewer 2: Can you please explain a bit further what each of these mechanisms does and also if you should just apply one, or if all of them should be applied as defence-in-depth mechanism?

> #### Dynamic analysis

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Dynamic Analysis
```

> To identify the existence of this vulnerability, create a sample apk consiting of a single activity and toast dialog. Upon installing the sample apk on the device and post launching it if the toast dialog overlays on the application to test then it is vulnerable to tapjacking vulnerability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To identify the existence of this vulnerability, create a sample APK consisting of a single activity and Toast dialog. Upon installing the sample APK on the device and post launching it, if the toast dialog overlays on the application to test then it is vulnerable to Tapjacking.
```

Reviewer: I'm not sure on this part. I've just read it quickly and cannot really follow how to test this. Maybe this could be a bit more explicit or use a real example with screenshots (?)

> Apart from this an automated tool, [QARK](https://github.com/linkedin/qark) can also be used to test this vulnerability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Apart from this is an automated tool, called [QARK](https://github.com/linkedin/qark "Qark") that can also be used to test for this vulnerability.
```

Reviewer 2: Have you ever used Qark and is it working reliable? Do you have a test app to showcase Qark and how to use it? If so, you could make a short writeup here.

1. For the actual persistence: Use the techniques described in the data storage chapter.
2. For reflection-based approaches: Use Xposed to hook into the deserialization methods or add unprocessable information to the serialized objects to see how they are handled (e.g., whether the application crashes or extra information can be extracted by enriching the objects).

### Testing for Tapjacking Vulnerability (MSTG-PLATFORM-9)

#### Overview

> Tapjacking is a vulnerability in which the malicious application abuses the screen overlay feature of Android to capture user taps and keystrokes. This is possible because an active screen overlay can listen for taps and intercept any information being passed in the underlying activity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tapjacking is a vulnerability in which the malicious application abuses the screen overlay feature of Android to capture user taps and keystrokes. This is possible because an active screen overlay can listen for taps and intercept any information being passed to the underlying activity. Please refer to [this article](https://blog.devknox.io/tapjacking-android-prevent/ "What is Tapjacking in Android and How to Prevent It") for more details.
```

Over the years many known malwares like MazorBot, BankBot, MysteryBot have been abusing screen overlay feature to target business critical applications, namely in the banking sector. The [blog](https://www.infosecurity-magazine.com/opinions/overlay-attacks-safeguard-mobile/ "blog") discusses more about these type of malwares.

#### Static Analysis

Check the source code for implementation of any of the below techniques:

> - Override [`onFilterTouchEventForSecurity`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/View#onFilterTouchEventForSecurity%28android.view.MotionEvent%29 "onFilterTouchEventForSecurity")

Reviewer: I'd switch positions of this point and the next one as this one is more fine-grained.
```suggestion
- Override [`onFilterTouchEventForSecurity`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/View#onFilterTouchEventForSecurity%28android.view.MotionEvent%29 "onFilterTouchEventForSecurity") for more fine-grained control and to implement a custom security policy for views.
```

> - Set [`android:filterTouchesWhenObscured`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/View.html#setFilterTouchesWhenObscured%28boolean%29 "android:filterTouchesWhenObscured") to true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Set the layout attribute [`android:filterTouchesWhenObscured`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/View#attr_android:filterTouchesWhenObscured "android:filterTouchesWhenObscured") to true or call [`setFilterTouchesWhenObscured`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/View.html#setFilterTouchesWhenObscured%28boolean%29 "setFilterTouchesWhenObscured").
```

> - [FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/MotionEvent.html#FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED "FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check [FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/MotionEvent.html#FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED "FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED") (since API level 9) or [FLAG_WINDOW_IS_PARTIALLY_OBSCURED](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/MotionEvent.html#FLAG_WINDOW_IS_PARTIALLY_OBSCURED "FLAG_WINDOW_IS_PARTIALLY_OBSCURED") (starting on API level 29). 
```

> When either of the first two techniques are implemented, the Android framework will discard touches or taps that are received from any other visible window. This will safeguard users against this severe vulnerability.

Reviewer: Can we really ensure that this completely safeguards users against this vulnerability? Could you please give some more details on _why_?

> The third technique can be applied to specific components instead of the application as a whole. This type of mitigation can be used when there is a business need to allow overlay feature by third party application. In these cases, the developer must identify all sensitive input fields and apply `FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED` to them, minimizing the impact of the tapjacking vulnerability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The third technique can be applied to specific components instead of the application as a whole. This type of mitigation can be used when there is a business need to allow overlay feature by a third party application. In these cases, the developer must identify all sensitive input UI elements and apply `FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED` or `FLAG_WINDOW_IS_PARTIALLY_OBSCURED` to them, minimizing the impact of the tapjacking vulnerability. An appropriate response to this check might be to drop the suspect touches or to take additional precautions to confirm the user's actual intent.
```

#### Dynamic Analysis

> To identify the existence of this vulnerability, create a sample APK consisting of a single activity and Toast dialog. Upon installing the sample APK on the device and post launching it, if the toast dialog overlays on the application to test then it is vulnerable to Tapjacking.

Reviewer: For me it's still not clear how to test this dynamically, could you please include some more specific steps? References to blogs and or example apps will also help.

> The third technique can be applied to specific components instead of the application as a whole. This type of mitigation can be used when there is a business need to allow overlay feature by a third party application. In these cases, the developer must identify all sensitive input UI elements and apply `FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED` or `FLAG_WINDOW_IS_PARTIALLY_OBSCURED` to them, minimizing the impact of the tapjacking vulnerability. An appropriate response to this check might be to drop the suspect touches or to take additional precautions to confirm the user's actual intent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The third technique can be applied to specific components instead of the application as a whole. This type of mitigation can be used when there is a business need to allow overlay feature by a third party application. In these cases, the developer must identify all sensitive input UI elements and apply `FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED` or `FLAG_WINDOW_IS_PARTIALLY_OBSCURED` to them, minimizing the impact of the tapjacking vulnerability. An appropriate response to this check might be to drop the suspect touches or to take additional precautions to confirm the user's actual intent.

As a final note, always remember to properly check the API level that app is targeting and the implications that this has. For instance, [Android 8.0 (API level 26) introduced changes](https://developer.android.com/about/versions/oreo/android-8.0-changes#all-aw "Alert windows") to apps requiring `SYSTEM_ALERT_WINDOW` ("draw on top"). From this API level on, apps using `TYPE_APPLICATION_OVERLAY` will be always [shown above other windows](https://developer.android.com/about/versions/oreo/android-8.0-changes#all-aw "Alert Windows") having other types such as `TYPE_SYSTEM_OVERLAY` or `TYPE_SYSTEM_ALERT`. You can use this information to ensure that no overlay attacks may occur at least for this app in this concrete Android version.
```

Over the years many known malwares like MazorBot, BankBot, MysteryBot have been abusing screen overlay feature to target business critical applications, namely in the banking sector. The [blog](https://www.infosecurity-magazine.com/opinions/overlay-attacks-safeguard-mobile/ "blog") discusses more about these type of malwares.

#### Static Analysis

Check the source code for implementation of any of the below techniques:

- Override [`onFilterTouchEventForSecurity`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/View#onFilterTouchEventForSecurity%28android.view.MotionEvent%29 "onFilterTouchEventForSecurity")
- Set [`android:filterTouchesWhenObscured`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/View.html#setFilterTouchesWhenObscured%28boolean%29 "android:filterTouchesWhenObscured") to true
- [FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/MotionEvent.html#FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED "FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED")

> When either of the first two controls are implemented, the android framework will discard touches or taps that are received from any other visible window. This will safeguard users against this severe vulnerability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When either of the first two techniques are implemented, the Android framework will discard touches or taps that are received from any other visible window. This will safeguard users against this severe vulnerability.
```

> The third control, when applied, provides safeguard to the components and not to the whole application. This type of mitigation can be used when there is a business need to allow overlay feature by third party application. In this cases the developer must identify sensitive input fields from the application and should associate it with the third control. This would minimise the impact of Tapjacking vulnerability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The third technique can be applied to specific components instead of the application as a whole. This type of mitigation can be used when there is a business need to allow overlay feature by third party application. In these cases, the developer must identify all sensitive input fields and apply `FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED` to them, minimizing the impact of the tapjacking vulnerability.
```

Reviewer: I'm not sure if I understand this sentence: "This type of mitigation can be used when there is a business need to allow overlay feature by third party application." Do you mean overlay is needed by 3rd party components of an app?

Hence based upon the requirement any of these controls can be implemented.

When any of the first two controls is implemented, the applications is not vulnerable anymore to Tapjacking.

> 

Reviewer: I'd remove these sentences as they seem a bit redundant.
```suggestion

```

#### Dynamic Analysis

> To identify the existence of this vulnerability, create a sample APK consisting of a single activity and Toast dialog. Upon installing the sample APK on the device and post launching it, if the toast dialog overlays on the application to test then it is vulnerable to Tapjacking.

Reviewer: Unfortunately it's not clear how to test this and I agree with @TheDauntless, more details and research is required here.

Author: Apologies for the delay @cpholguera 

Thanks @TheDauntless  for suggesting Cloak and Dagger. 

I went through to the research and noted got clarity that,

- Cloak and dagger are basically attacks demonstarting new tricks to abuse overlay functionality. It has series of exploits like ContextAwareClickjacking, Invisible Grid Attacks, etc. 
- The root cause of this is SYSTEM_ALERT_WINDOW permission which is used by overlays. Thus preventing overlay will prevent the application from all these series of exploits. 

Please let me know your views on the same.

For detecting Tapjacking, Apart from QARK, Soon I would be submitting an apk created by me to the mobile security project, which can be leveraged to check this vulnerability.

> Apart from this there is an automated tool, called [QARK](https://github.com/linkedin/qark "Qark") that can also be used to test for this vulnerability. To understad usage of this tool and how to use it for detecting tapjacking, the [link](https://resources.infosecinstitute.com/android-penetration-tools-walkthrough-series-qark "link") from infosecinstitute can be referred. In this article FourGoats application is used to check for different vulnerabilties, including Tapjacking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also test this vulnerability using an automated tool called [QARK](https://github.com/linkedin/qark "Qark"). [This article](https://resources.infosecinstitute.com/android-penetration-tools-walkthrough-series-qark "link") from Infosec institute explains this tool and how to use it for detecting tapjacking using OWASP's GoatDroid application.
```

### Static Analysis

> You can find some general guidelines about Android View security in the [Android Developer Documentation](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/View#security "View Security"), please be sure to read them carefully. For instance, the so-called _touch filtering_ is a common defense against tapjacking, contribute to safeguarding users against these vulnerabilities, usually in combination with other techniques and considerations as we introduce in this section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find some general guidelines about Android View security in the [Android Developer Documentation](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/View#security "View Security"), please be sure to read them carefully. For instance, the so-called _touch filtering_ is a common defense against tapjacking, which contributes to safeguarding users against these vulnerabilities, usually in combination with other techniques and considerations as we introduce in this section.
```

To start your static analysis you can check the source code for the following methods and attributes (non-exhaustive list):

- Override [`onFilterTouchEventForSecurity`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/View#onFilterTouchEventForSecurity%28android.view.MotionEvent%29 "onFilterTouchEventForSecurity") for more fine-grained control and to implement a custom security policy for views.
- Set the layout attribute [`android:filterTouchesWhenObscured`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/View#attr_android:filterTouchesWhenObscured "android:filterTouchesWhenObscured") to true or call [`setFilterTouchesWhenObscured`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/View.html#setFilterTouchesWhenObscured%28boolean%29 "setFilterTouchesWhenObscured").
- Check [FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/MotionEvent.html#FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED "FLAG_WINDOW_IS_OBSCURED") (since API level 9) or [FLAG_WINDOW_IS_PARTIALLY_OBSCURED](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/view/MotionEvent.html#FLAG_WINDOW_IS_PARTIALLY_OBSCURED "FLAG_WINDOW_IS_PARTIALLY_OBSCURED") (starting on API level 29). 

> Some attributes might affect the app as a whole, while others can be applied to specific components. The latter would be the case when, for example, there is a business need to specifically allow overlays while wanting to protect sensitive input UI elements. The developers might also take additional precautions to confirm the user's actual intent which might be legitimate and tell it apart form a potential attack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some attributes might affect the app as a whole, while others can be applied to specific components. The latter would be the case when, for example, there is a business need to specifically allow overlays while wanting to protect sensitive input UI elements. The developers might also take additional precautions to confirm the user's actual intent which might be legitimate and tell it apart from a potential attack.
```

- MSTG-PLATFORM-5: "JavaScript is disabled in WebViews unless explicitly required."
- MSTG-PLATFORM-6: "WebViews are configured to allow only the minimum set of protocol handlers required (ideally, only https is supported). Potentially dangerous handlers, such as file, tel and app-id, are disabled."
- MSTG-PLATFORM-7: "If native methods of the app are exposed to a WebView, verify that the WebView only renders JavaScript contained within the app package."
- MSTG-PLATFORM-8: "Object serialization, if any, is implemented using safe serialization APIs."
- MSTG-PLATFORM-9: "The app does not allow any other application to overlay on itself."
- MSTG-ARCH-9: "A mechanism for enforcing updates of the mobile app exists."

#### Tools

- Drozer - <https://github.com/mwrlabs/drozer>

> - QARK - <https://github.com/linkedin/qark>

Reviewer: removed as we're removing the dynamic section for now.
```suggestion
```
